---
title: Using SQLC and Goose With Golang
description: Using SQLC and Goose With Golang
tags: [go, sqlc, goose]
pubDate: 'March 15 2026'
---

## What is SQLC and Goose
In 2025, I decided that I wanted to invest some time learning another programming language. The rise of AI is making us cognitively lazy, and I wanted to do something to avoid it. I chose Go because of its simplicity.
I was using boot.dev to learn about the go programming language, and was also checking the community on X and Reddit.

At one point in my learning journey I came across sqlc and Goose. I learned about them from boot.dev as part of a course on how to access a database with Go. Like everything else in the Go community, it shines with its simplicity. In the age of AI I absolutely love the old school [sqlc documentation](https://docs.sqlc.dev/en/latest/index.html).

After learning about sqlc, I did some research about ORMs in Go. There aren't many ORMs in Go, it kinda makes sense as ORMs often add complexity instead of removing it (unless you are drizzle) and sqlc is not an ORM. You write SQL queries which get converted to type-safe Go code when you run the `sqlc` command. sqlc expects a .yaml file at the root of the project and you also run the `sqlc` command from the root. Here is an example yaml file

```yaml
version: "2"
sql:
  - schema: "sql/schema"
    queries: "sql/queries"
    engine: "postgresql"
    gen:
      go:
        out: "internal/database"
```

You write your SQL queries inside the `sql/queries` folder and when you run the `sqlc` command, they will be generated into type-safe Go code inside the `internal/database` folder.

Here is an example sql query with sqlc query annotation

```sql
-- name: GetAuthor :one
SELECT * FROM authors
WHERE id = $1 LIMIT 1;
```

After running sqlc, it will generate a function which will take the id as an argument. Example usage

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"database/sql"
	"fmt"
	"log"

	_ "github.com/lib/pq"
	"yourmodule/internal/database" // this folder will be autogenerated by sqlc
)

func main() {
	ctx := context.Background()
	db, err := sql.Open("postgres", "postgres://postgres:root@127.0.0.1/db?sslmode=disable")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}
	dbconfig := database.New(db)
	author, err := dbconfig.GetAuthor(ctx, 1)
	if err != nil {
		fmt.Println("Error:", err)
		return
	}
	fmt.Println(author)
}
```

`database.New(db)` this is where we bind the database connection with the database config generated by sqlc inside the `internal/database` folder, it's the bridge between Go's standard database/sql package and sqlc's generated query methods.

The example I added is a very simplified version.

Now you may have also noticed that we have `- schema: "sql/schema"` in our sqlc config, this is where we define our database schemas, and we use goose as a database migration tool. Example schema with goose

```sql

-- +goose Up
CREATE TABLE authors(
    id UUID PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL,
    created_at TIMESTAMP,
    updated_at TIMESTAMP,
    email TEXT
);

-- +goose Down
DROP TABLE authors;
```

Similar to sqlc, we use query annotations to bind SQL queries to [goose](https://github.com/pressly/goose). You can run goose from anywhere in the project, but I prefer to run it from the root of the project. Goose requires a schema path and DB URL to run migrations. Example goose command

```bash
goose -dir sql/schema postgres "$DB_URL" up
```

If you are coming from using an ORM like Active Record or Eloquent, you might find this verbose. You get less automation — with Active Record and Eloquent you can define a model using a single command, whereas with goose and sqlc you are just writing SQL.

## Workflow

This is how you would work on a project with sqlc and goose. While you can use goose to autogenerate empty migration files, I prefer to write it by hand. Here is an example workflow

sql/schema/001_users.sql
```sql
-- +goose Up
CREATE TABLE users(
    id UUID PRIMARY KEY NOT NULL,
    created_at TIMESTAMP,
    updated_at TIMESTAMP,
    email TEXT,
    hashed_password TEXT NOT NULL DEFAULT 'unset'
);

-- +goose Down
DROP TABLE users;
```

And you run `goose -dir sql/schema postgres "$DB_URL" up`

Now we write the queries

sql/queries/001_users.sql
```sql
-- name: CreateUser :one
INSERT INTO users (id, created_at, updated_at, email, hashed_password)
VALUES (
    gen_random_uuid(),
    NOW(),
    NOW(),
    $1,
    $2
)
RETURNING *;

-- name: DeleteUsers :exec
DELETE FROM users;

-- name: GetUserByEmail :one
SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = $1;

-- name: GetUserById :one
SELECT * FROM users WHERE id=$1;


-- name: UpdateUser :one
UPDATE users
SET email = $2, hashed_password = $3, updated_at = NOW()
WHERE id = $1
RETURNING *;
```

I guess this could become tedious for large scale projects, but personally I think the less abstraction from traditional ORMs is a good thing. You learn to think in terms of SQL instead of some arbitrary patterns.

That's pretty much it. If you need to change anything you write another migration like any traditional ORM, example:
```sql
-- +goose Up
ALTER TABLE users ADD COLUMN hashed_password TEXT NOT NULL DEFAULT 'unset';

-- +goose Down
ALTER TABLE users DROP COLUMN hashed_password;
```

Personally I like this approach quite a lot. I haven't developed any large or even medium application with it yet, but so far I am a fan of this approach. In the future I might give [GORM](https://github.com/go-gorm/gorm) a go.
